---
geometry: margin=1in
---

The Left is in a moment when "inevitability" is further than ever from
referring to what it once did, Marx's prophecy of revolution. It has come to
mean instead the inescapability of the world economic system, the sense that if
a revolution were coming it would have already. The crisis-prone nature of
capitalism is ever further naturalized, even more so as the authors of each
successive crisis are paid off for their trouble and the same risky financial
vehicles are trotted out with new, equally obfuscatory names and the same
underlying flaws. Opposing it, to the layman, seems more and more like voting
against the weather. As Fredric Jameson puts it, "What is crippling is...the
universal belief, not only that this tendency is irreversible, but that the
historic alternatives to capitalism have proven unviable and impossible, and
that no other socioeconomic system is conceivable, let alone practically
available" (xii). In response to this perceived inevitability, he points to
Utopianism in political and, most relevant for my purposes, literary contexts
as the first essential step in finding a way beyond the current social system.
He believes this so strongly that he claims "one cannot imagine any fundamental
change in our social existence which has not first thrown off Utopian visions
like so many sparks from a comet" (xii). The greater a broken system's
perceived permanence, it would seem, the more desperately such a trail of
sparks is needed.

In no context is this inevitability more "crippling" than in environmentalism,
over which the specters of climate change and a desperately battered biome loom
ever larger---speaking of "voting against the weather." And yet, though there
may be further to go here than anywhere, there is reason to believe that we are
further along the way. Consensus among world leaders that radical action is
necessary exceeds almost any comparable issue, and opposing this conclusion
looks increasingly like madness. Naomi Klein's recent book, *This Changes
Everything*, argues that the dire necessity of systemic change in response to
climate change can and must be platform for the social platform of the
Left---and indeed, that no lesser degree or alternative form of change will be
sufficient to prevent disastrous change to the climate. Despite the necessity
of radical, global social change and the apparent readiness of the political
forces involved across the spectrum, there is so far no recognizable and
avowedly Utopian environmentalist movement. This is not to say that there are
not examples of green Utopianism, historical and contemporary, literary and
actual: they are many and various. But they are not yet recognized as an
historical movement in the way that Utopianism in general is, and they have not
been granted the importance to environmentalism as Jameson grants his "sparks."
At least in literary terms, the studies bringing these isolated actions into a
movement have not yet been done.

It is beyond the scope of this or any single paper to trace in full what I am
calling the "ecotopian imagination." But in beginning to approach the topic as
it appears in American fiction, it will first be necessary to theoretically
develop the term itself and test its usefulness in a condensed case study. I
will use this space to begin both of these tasks. First, I will continue to
read Fredric Jameson's meditations on Utopianism in *Archaeologies of the
Future*, setting it against the recent surface reading movement to ask what an
ecotopian analysis must do. I will then take the term as an occasion to read
two related moments in two Willa Cather novels against each other, asking how
two different imaginative reconstructions of a single space ...[etc]

***

Walter Benjamin tells us in his "Theses on the Philosophy of History" that to
make an historical articulation of the past "means to seize hold of a memory as
it flashes up at a moment of danger"---for such an image of the past
"only...flashes up at the instant when it can be recognized" (255). In moments
such as this, when a globalized system of production has rearranged the pieces
of the world and disrupted most regional ecosystems, images of enclosed systems
are particularly recognizable as environmentally useful paradigms. Jameson
identifies such images as fundamental to Utopianism. He defines "totality" as
"precisely this combination of closure and system, in the name of autonomy and
self-sufficiency" and says that such totality can be "ultimately the source
of...otherness or radical, even alien, difference" (5). From an environmental
perspective, this framing of Utopianism is quite appealing. In the first place,
the closed system has been an important aspect of ecological thought since
ecological thought existed. Whether in the form of Darwin's discoveries in the
Galapagos, the Biosphere 2 lab in Arizona, or "Spaceship Earth" as an early
paradigm of sustainability in U.S. political discourse, the concept recurs in
many different forms. 

It remains to be seen what the Utopian version of this closure brings to
ecological analysis that ecological analysis does not already have. The
emphasis on autonomy and self-sufficiency offers the beginnings of an answer:
these concepts forge a link between the closed ecological system and historical
instances of separation and autonomy, letting one ask how ecological factors
might interact with concepts of the nation state and sovereignty.  Emphasizing
"difference" as a feature of Utopian totality may also let us draw lines
between the evolutionary processes of differentiation, ecological diversity,
and difference in the sense of culture and identity. What ends up being seen in
many cases is that ecological differentiation tends to go hand in hand with
other forms of difference: sexual, national, economic, and "cultural" more
broadly.

In asking what using the ecotopian imagination as a basis of inquiry can show
us about a text, then, we must pose several pointed questions. First, what is
the closed system in question, and in what conditions does it arise? Second,
what unique characteristics can we detect in the material conditions of this
closed system---its ecology, spatial characteristics, built environment---and
what can this *reading for material* tell us about the social systems those
material traces enable? And finally, how do the material aspects of this unique
space contribute to the thematic apparatus of the text? This last point can be
further specified to emphasize situations in which difference of any sort,
perhaps especially sexual difference and cultural "contact zones," comes into
play. 
