---
---

If our only sources were political novelists like Frank Norris, Charlotte
Perkins Gilman, and Henry Roth, we might reasonably conclude that to live
between the turn of the century and the Depression was to be forever engaged in
a frantic, claustrophobic search for the lost frontier. Norris's McTeague
bursts out of a world crowded with drawing rooms, in which "nature is cosey,
intimate, small, and homelike, like a good-natured housewife," and arrives
triumphantly where the "entire region is untamed...a vast, unconquered brute of
the Philocene epoch, savage, sullen, and magnificently indifferent to men"
(209). In a neat, perhaps deliberate inversion some fifteen years later, Gilman
creates a new kind of frontier for her male protagonists. Where the "savage"
wilderness is replaced with precisely the "small," "homelike" natural world in
which a combination of natural impediments and intentional population control
prevent the all-female society from growing beyond a certain scale or
population---and it is implied that this limitation causally prevents that
savagery itself from developing. The commitment to or rejection of expansionism
is reflected in the conception of the space itself, and more specifically how
human communities interact with their natural environments.

Whatever these two examples might suggest, the presence of something resembling
"nature" or wilderness need not always define the search for the frontier. It
is just as present in the motivations of the endless wave of immigrants landing
in the densely packed and distinctly natureless apartment blocks of New York
City in 1907. The geographical frontier was lost long before they
arrived---declared dead in the preamble to the 1890 census (Turner 199). But
despite the utter absence of its natural and geographic instantiations, the
frontier exists for Roth's immigrants as a necessary commitment to invent new
social formations that mediate between their existing cultural identity and
material conditions of life that are entirely alien to them. 

Population density, and the concomitant changes in the material conditions of
sustenance and production, define the difference between the frontier as it
exists in the work of these three authors. In all of their work, the actual or
conceptual frontier gives rise to an *act of imaginative social projection* on
the part of the characters or the narrative itself. But the gradient of density
from Norris's work to Roth's corresponds to the attainability of these new
formations and the perceived agency in resisting the dominant culture. Density,
then, finally determines the amount of agency granted to the speculative mode
of political creativity that the presence of a frontier tends to inspire.

On one pole, Norris's *McTeague* and *The Octopus* depict the search for the
lost frontier for those whose spatial imagination is defined by areas of low
population density. His American-born rural workers keep the American West and
its ethos alive, although not necessarily stable, until their community
structure is dismantled by the intervention of a global system based on
density. On the other pole is Henry Roth's *Call It Sleep*, in which the only
choices presented by what we might call the "full frontier" are one of two
dominant cultures: assimilation to American culture or identification with an
enclave of immigrant culture. The attempt to inhabit density without such
acquiescence is nearly suicidal for individual and community alike. By
suspending density, and thus the frontier, in a fixed state, Gilman presents a
middle way, in which the dominant culture is subject to a constant process of
inventive refinement without engaging in capitalist forms of unrestrained
growth. Nevertheless, it is a middle state of political agency in the extent to
which it makes dissensus impossible.

### Materiality and Social Formation in the Frontier Thesis

>the frontier is the outer edge of the wave-- the meeting point between savagery
and civilization.... The American frontier is sharply distinguished from the
European frontier---a fortified boundary line running through dense
populations. The most significant thing about the American frontier is, that it
lies at the hither edge of free land. (200)

The version of social development that occurs in situations of high density
includes the "evolution of institutions...such as the rise of representative
government; the differentiation of simple colonial governments into complex
organs; the progress from primitive industrial society, without division of
labor, up to manufacturing civilization" (200). The process Turner describes
has interesting (if, perhaps, unintended) resonances with a Marxist
base-superstructure theory of historical development. Density relies not only
on the material conditions of production and distribution but on the foundation
of all material analysis, the conditions of the soil in an ever-changing
landscape. But as the frontier continues and formerly unpopulated areas
increase in density, a Europeanization of frontier development occurs, and the
frontier begins to resemble heavily populated areas. As the frontier continues
to move outwards, Turner suggests, we witness in what *was* frontier a
"recurrence of the process of evolution in each western area reached in the
process of expansion," or in other words, a shift from the limitless (American)
paradigm of the frontier to the dense and limited (European) paradigm (200)
Thus, the movement of the American frontier is not only a situation of changing
density. It is a shifting dialectical relationship between land and social
formations in which density figures as an essential middle term. 

In the US --- frontier allows for the construction of the *local* as a
community paradigm---a concept that relies dialectically on the destruction of
localism through globalization. The "frontier" as a literary determinant is an
act of mind arising in conditions of increasing density---a scramble to regain
what is lost---and what is lost tends to be inflected with European communal
structures[, especially in the case of immigrants.] 

### Community Without Density on the Vanishing Frontier

McTeague concludes with the flight from high-density, settled city to the
low-density frontier in which McTeague's brutish, uncivilized nature finds the
last shreds of the environment in which it is able to be viable. Everything in
these marginal zones works according to the laws of the American West in which
he was raised, and which instilled in him a set of values and proclivities that
are unable to withstand the "domesticated" culture of high-density
environments.

...

In the Octopus, the more fundamental relations of the low-density local---the
individual ranch, the community of farmers, the commonwealth---is destroyed by
its incorporation in a larger division of labor maintained and determined by
areas of greater density. A modern agricultural system is being built, and with
violence a flow of material energy in the form of nutrients is being
established, its tons of wheat flowing from the low-density communities of
farmers to the high-density urban communities. The "frontier," inasmuch as it
exists, exists in the minds of the farmers who believe that, by enclosure and
by recusing themselves from the global market, they can hold on to the
autonomous communal structures. 

Perhaps more accurately, the "frontier" as the glorification of low population
density is most distinctly evident in the cultural production it inspires:
Presley's largely hypothetical "Epic of the West," which is abandoned when the
truth of global markets becomes inescapable.

# Immigrants and High-Density Frontier Communities

Roth: reclaiming European community in high-density situations. 

Moment of maximum density: the entire community becomes focused in a single
body, a moment resulting in death. Replaces localism and European communalism
as the source of meaning. Mechanization/modernization of community

It is impossible to reasonably sustain Turner's differentiation between the
European and the American frontier for long, however, when we recognize that
for many twentieth-century immigrants to America, the conditions necessary for
the European, high-density "frontier" they left behind was mirrored in the
high-density urban environments into which they arrived. In Henry Roth's
depiction of this situation in *Call It Sleep*, the frontier is not threatened
and vanishing by a global system of density, as it is in Norris's novels, nor
is it arrested in a utopian state of purity as it is in Gilman's. For Roth's
European-American, the frontier is simultaneously always already lost as an
object of desire and paradoxically relocated onto Europe itself. But this
ultimate unattainability of the frontier results in reproduction of the
European communalism that frontier communities mimic, in the highest-density
conditions imagineable. In these conditions of high density, globalization is
in a dialectical relationship with localism: even as it dismantles the
communities on which the very concept of "local" rely, it reproduces them in
compressed miniature; these communities in turn both further the progress of
globalization by contributing to its division of labor and make that globality
more visible by sheer concentration of difference.


# Limited Density, Frozen Frontier

Gilman: reconstruction of the frontier, narratively; invocation of the frontier
in history and apocalyptic event. Limitation of density as a function of
carrying capacity. 

The society of Herland is a re-establishment of the frontier precisely because
it rejects the conditions of density that are so fundamental to modernity.

...

Herland, then, may adopt certain models of high-density community in the way
that it mimics globalization's creation of a total system. But in the biosocial
systems it establishes for itself, it makes density a structural impossibility
by setting its carrying capacity at such a low level. To put this operation in
terms of the frontier---for the frontier as it has been discussed here is
finally a product of density---the controlled carrying capacity arrests the
frontier as in a snow globe, preventing it from expanding or contracting. And
with the frontier, it arrests frontier-like conditions of communalism.

This is hardly Norris's frontier of jubilant savagery, though, as is evident
from the way the Herlanders treat wildness. Gilman's re-construction of the
frontier rewrites the entire narrative of expansionist progress, including the
premise that increasing expansion and increasing density lead out of savagery
and into civilization.

...


# Conclusion: The White Frontier

It is no coincidence that a hermeneutic principle criticized for its
indifference to history's victims fails to account for non-white literary
histories. It hardly needs to be reiterated (and yet needs always to be
reiterated despite) that the "hither edge of free land" in Turner's thesis had
on the other side of it, not empty space, but societies that fall under the
categorization of "savagery" in this estimation. But also absent from this
frontier theory of literary density are the narratives of the invisible labor
force pushing the frontier forward---a movement that, in Turner's hands, is
entirely naturalized and without mechanism or agent, as though the frontier
border were literally blown forth by the winds of "progress." 

For black voices, a different perspective is required, but perhaps not an
entirely new paradigm. ... [Speed round of Hurston, Invisible Man, Black Boy.] 

