---
---

B2 The Frontier Question

Frontier Q: No Cather, No Jewett: 3 authors

* Don't forget the dialectic and aufhebung/aufgehoben (verb/adj of
    supercession)

Norris: McTeague, The Octopus, The Pit

Gilman: Herland, "The Yellow Wallpaper"?

Roth: Call It Sleep

In the US --- frontier allows for the construction of the *local* as a
community paradigm---a concept that relies dialectically on the destruction of
localism through globalization. The "frontier" as a literary determinant is an
act of mind arising in conditions of increasing density---a scramble to regain
what is lost---and what is lost tends to be inflected with European communal
structures[, especially in the case of immigrants.] 

# Part I: Community Without Density on the Vanishing Frontier

Order: Norris---frontier communities, structures of communities, the sense of
*loss*? Always occurs in the 

The west

- In part 3: Octopus: dialectic of local and global expressed in the railroad whistle that
    begins the novel; cf L. Marx, Machine in the Garden

McTeague concludes with the flight from high-density, settled city to the
low-density frontier in which McTeague's brutish, uncivilized nature finds the
last shreds of the environment in which it is able to be viable. Everything in
these marginal zones works according to the laws of the American West in which
he was raised, and which instilled in him a set of values and proclivities that
are unable to withstand the "domesticated" culture of high-density
environments.

...

In the Octopus, the more fundamental relations of the low-density local---the
individual ranch, the community of farmers, the commonwealth---is destroyed by
its incorporation in a larger division of labor maintained and determined by
areas of greater density. A modern agricultural system is being built, and with
violence a flow of material energy in the form of nutrients is being
established, its tons of wheat flowing from the low-density communities of
farmers to the high-density urban communities. The "frontier," inasmuch as it
exists, exists in the minds of the farmers who believe that, by enclosure and
by recusing themselves from the global market, they can hold on to the
autonomous communal structures. 

Perhaps more accurately, the "frontier" as the glorification of low population
density is most distinctly evident in the cultural production it inspires:
Presley's largely hypothetical "Epic of the West," which is abandoned when the
truth of global markets becomes inescapable.

# Part II: Limited Density, Frozen Frontier

Gilman: reconstruction of the frontier, narratively; invocation of the frontier
in history and apocalyptic event. Limitation of density as a function of
carrying capacity. 

The society of Herland is a re-establishment of the frontier precisely because
it rejects the conditions of density that are so fundamental to modernity.

...

Herland, then, may adopt certain models of high-density community in the way
that it mimics globalization's creation of a total system. But in the biosocial
systems it establishes for itself, it makes density a structural impossibility
by setting its carrying capacity at such a low level. To put this operation in
terms of the frontier---for the frontier as it has been discussed here is
finally a product of density---the controlled carrying capacity arrests the
frontier as in a snow globe, preventing it from expanding or contracting. And
with the frontier, it arrests frontier-like conditions of communalism.

This is hardly Norris's frontier of jubilant savagery, though, as is evident
from the way the Herlanders treat wildness. Gilman's re-construction of the
frontier rewrites the entire narrative of expansionist progress, including the
premise that increasing expansion and increasing density lead out of savagery
and into civilization.

...


# Part III: Immigrants and High-Density Frontier Communities

Roth: reclaiming European community in high-density situations. 

Moment of maximum density: the entire community becomes focused in a single
body, a moment resulting in death. Replaces localism and European communalism
as the source of meaning. Mechanization/modernization of community

It is impossible to reasonably sustain Turner's differentiation between the
European and the American frontier for long, however, when we recognize that
for many twentieth-century immigrants to America, the conditions necessary for
the European, high-density "frontier" they left behind was mirrored in the
high-density urban environments into which they arrived. In Henry Roth's
depiction of this situation in *Call It Sleep*, the frontier is not threatened
and vanishing by a global system of density, as it is in Norris's novels, nor
is it arrested in a utopian state of purity as it is in Gilman's. For Roth's
European-American, the frontier is simultaneously always already lost as an
object of desire and paradoxically relocated onto Europe itself. But this
ultimate unattainability of the frontier results in reproduction of the
European communalism that frontier communities mimic, in the highest-density
conditions imagineable. In these conditions of high density, globalization is
in a dialectical relationship with localism: even as it dismantles the
communities on which the very concept of "local" rely, it reproduces them in
compressed miniature; these communities in turn both further the progress of
globalization by contributing to its division of labor and make that globality
more visible by sheer concentration of difference.
