---
author: Phillip R. Polefrone
date: 29 October 2015
---

Texts:

**Core Texts of the Environmental Humanities**

- The Machine in the Garden
- Silent Spring
- Radical Ecology

**Environmental Justice**

- Varieties of Environmentalism
- American Indian Literature, Environmental Justice, and Ecocriticism
- Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor

Given that the environmental justice movement has arisen in part because of the
shortcomings of its forebears, this pairing of themes has the potential to be
somewhat volatile. I take "environmental justice" to mean the recognition that
environmentalism must proceed hand in hand with social justice movements;
implicit in this definition is also the recognition that it has *not* always
done so. By reading these core texts in such close proximity to a more recent
flourishing of environmental thinking, then, I will necessarily be tracing some
definitional tensions of the environmental humanities as a discipline: what
Lawrence Buell elsewhere calls "first-wave" and "second-wave ecocriticism,"
ecocentrism and anthropocentrism, full-belly environmentalism and the
environmentalism of the poor, Americanist ecocriticism and postcolonial
ecocriticism. The list could continue, but the theme that motivates it would be
the same, and it can be broadly glossed as the demand by many more recent
ecocritics for a greater degree of intersectionality between environmental and
social activism.

Two of the more direct antagonists are Joni Adamson's *American Indian
Literature, Environmental Justice, and Ecocriticism* (2001) and Leo Marx's *The
Machine in the Garden* (1964), which would seem to be making very similar
arguments in some senses were they not so diametrically opposed in others. They
share a core motivating concept, which Marx calls alternately "the middle
landscape" or "the middle state" and Adamson calls "the middle place." For
Marx, the "middle landscape" is primarily a largely symbolic resolution between
nature and culture---which can either mean nature and art, nature and
technological intervention, or wilderness and control. For Adamson, the "middle
place" is a state of equilibrium between respecting and using nature, but it is
also a reconciliation between *cultures* that predicate themselves on
exploiting or respecting their environment. In the most general sense, both
authors' refer to a compromise between the opposed structures of Prometheanism
and preservation of nature. 

Nevertheless, a silence exists between the two. Besides Marx's text preceding
Adamson's by some forty years, his side of the silence comes from his system's
inability to account for the most foundational concerns of environmental
justice. The poles of his motivating tension are between the Promethean impulse
and the preservative impulse among wealthy European men, whose will (whichever
pole reigns) will be imposed upon a landscape that is fashioned as empty. The
concerns of environmental justice are demarcated precisely by what Leo Marx
proscribes.

This orientation's apparent paucity from an environmental justice perspective
may provide the context for Adamson's side of the mutual silence: for despite
the renown of Marx's classic text and its best-known concept, the "middle
landscape" does not get so much as a footnote or index entry in Adamson's
development of a concept to which it would seem at least relevant, if only
contrapuntally. Expressing Adamson's concept in terms of Marx's earlier one, it
could be said that a *real* middle landscape is found in the ecological and
cultural ethics of the American Indian populations who Marx renders invisible,
in which the human-altered landscape can be admitted as "nature." By rendering
that more complicated and multifarious version of "environment," she
establishes a literal grounds for the overlapping social and environmental
concerns that motivate her book.

Adamson and Marx make such a good representative conflict, then, because their
similarities only make their differences more bitterly felt. As with many other
factions of the capital-L-Left, these would-be allies find their points of
confluence blotted out by overwhelming difference. This is not to say that it
should be otherwise, for the fundamental disagreement comes not out of
doctrinal quibbles but a more complex social consciousness in the movement as a
whole. In other words, one might think of environmental justice's conflicted
relationship to its forebears in terms of Walter Benjamin's well known
statement that "there is no document of civilization that is not at the same
time a document of barbarism," had Benjamin been referring more specifically to
environmentalism. The way out of this history of barbarism, to the ecocritic
who shares these concerns, is to correct the obfuscation of injustice by prior
environmentalisms and prevent it in those of the future by incorporating more
voices from more various communities. The question, which I do not have time to
explore here (if I am going to touch on the other texts), is whether there is a
cause to *cautiously* bridge this silence for the betterment of the current
conversation. If so, it is a path that I believe is open to a justice-oriented,
Americanist ecocriticism for the current generation of scholars.

It is tempting to allow this "first- and second-wave ecocriticism" dyad to
stand, uncomplicated, as a factor of time exclusively. But the publication of
*Silent Spring* in 1962, two years prior to *The Machine the Garden*, makes
impossible such a simple trajectory---not because *Silent Spring* is itself
committed to resolving the problematic silences of the environmental movement
on race and inequality, but because its own brand of anti-corporate
environmental justice laid the groundwork for a more robust understanding of
environmental racism that would come to fruition a generation later. Carson's
concern can be framed as a more materialist concern with the "Promethean"
tendencies of American culture, but not in the strictly intellectual sense that
Leo Marx pursues. Rather, she exposes the chemical alterations that enable the
twentieth-century American understanding of comfort. This technologically
enabled comfort is based implicitly on Prometheanism, with all the progressive
narratives that implies, and yet it poisons those that benefit from it.
Carson's rhetorical strategy relies on the ubiquity of what she observes, and
indeed her success in demonstrating that ubiquity can be measured by the
continued popularity of the book. But in a subtle way, this strategy also
obscures the differential risk from toxins to which minority racial groups are
subject. As both Joni Adamson and Carolyn Merchant discuss, the United Church
of Christ's Commission for Racial Justice in 1987 would disclose the highly
differentiated nature of risk from environmental toxins in their influential
report, a major step in establishing the concept of environmental racism.
Carson cannot be credited with establishing this concept, but the foundation of
environmental health activism that she set in motion was nevertheless
a necessary precursor.

Besides what it unwittingly led to in laying the groundwork for
environmental-racism activism, one of *Silent Spring*'s major contributions to
midcentury environmentalism was its focus on activism that was as much social
as it was strictly environmental---which could certainly not be said of Leo
Marx, who maintains a strictly analytical stance throughout, or other
environmental writers whose ethics too often seem to extend *only* to the land.
Carson inaugurates visibility-based environmental activism that anticipates
some of what Rob Nixon has recently developed in his *Slow Violence and the
Environmentalism of the Poor* (2011). The invisibility of what Carson describes
accounts for much of the rhetorical effect of her description, as she plays the
toxins (which are themselves "unspectacular" forms of violence in Nixon's
terms) against the more "spectacular," gruesome results. While he does not
specifically address this rhetorical juxtaposition, he does theorize the place
of visibility in environmental activism by urging new strategies on the part of
environmental activists to keep up with the channel-changing attention spans of
contemporary news cycles and their consumers. Both authors, then, unite social
activism and environmental activism through visibility. It is thus fitting that
Nixon takes Carson as a subject of his discussion, even though it is in the
context more of "ad feminam" attacks and gender-based silencing than as a
precursor to his own method.

The final "core" text, Carolyn Merchant's *Radical Ecology* (1992), is a
turning point in my list, as it introduces a genre that is very prevalent in
the environmental humanities as well as many concepts that can be used to
organize many of the conversations within the discipline. The *genre* it
inaugurates is the "state of the field" book, which is a form that many works
in the past two decades seem to take: Lawrence Buell, Ramachandra Guha and Joan
Martinez-Alier offer two more examples. The prevalence of this form is telling
in itself, as it indicates a high degree of variation within the field, of an
intensity that can be measured by the conceptual distance between subfields.
That a new overview seems to be required every half-decade or so also indicates
the rapid change occurring in activist and scholarly movements alike. Not just
the form itself, but the specific sections that make up this particular example
of it are telling: Merchant exhibits a trend common to overviews of the
environmental humanities, in which intellectual paradigms and activist
movements are put in close proximity and begin, to a certain extent, to blend.
Just as she is compelled to outline several ethical paradigms or variations on
deep ecology, Merchant gives a brief history of activist movements, their
intellectual commitments, and their situation at the time of writing. The
activist stance Rachel Carson represents (again, in contrast to more removed
analysis) is taken further by this common trope, in which the scholar links
academic work with in-the-trenches activism, putting the two tasks in a common
lineage.

Finally, the importance of Merchant's gesture to include environmental
activists of many stripes among a more academic overview goes further still in
Ramachandra Guha and Joan Martinez-Alier's *Varieties of Environmentalism*. The
collection of essays is somewhat difficult to characterize in the sense that it
encompasses work by two prolific authors on themes that hold together only
loosely---but it is possible to extract two related concepts from it as
representatives, the "environmentalism of the poor" and "vocabularies of
protest." The two concepts are related: the latter is an elaboration of
culturally and historically situated forms of protest that comprise both a set
of values (articulated or not) and a set of strategies for exercising those
values; the former is an umbrella term for a set of economic and cultural
situations that share common elements in their "vocabularies." To Guha and
Martinez-Alier, the ecological economist attempting to place a monetary value
on future goods is in the same lineage as indigenous "pluck-and-plant"
movements in Karnataka, India, in which populations dependent on an ecological
commons "plucked" nutrient-sapping eucalyptus trees in order to "plant" more
soil- and community-sustaining plants in their stead. Both groups are
exercising a certain "vocabulary of protest" that is dependent on their own
situated perspective and the goals they pursue as a result. 


